---
title: SAC Sciences Project Preliminary Proposal
author: Samuel Brew
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{setspace}
    - \doublespacing
---

I have been assigned to perform a comparative metallurgical analysis of six third-century CE *antoniniani*. In doing so, I wish to investigate how these coins relate to and reflect the debasing of the Roman currency in the third century, and the ensuing financial and governmental crisis. To do so, I wish to place these coins into known typologies wherever possible by studying any visually identifying information, such as letterings, hopefully allowing me to roughly date the coins. Having done this, I then wish to determine the composition of each of the coins and compare their silver content. Based on known trends, their percentage of silver to weight should decrease corresponding with how late in the third century they were produced, as the debasing of the currency became more radical later therein. Crucially, in order to perform these analyses, I will need to be able to determine the composition of the coins, and to do so I wish to use either X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) or Raman spectroscopy. Infrared spectroscopy is not of interest to me in this case due to its unsuitability for the analysis of totally inorganic objects such as these coins, and its necessarily destructive nature.

XRF is a portable and cheap technique optimal for metallurgical analysis. It would be highly effective at enabling me to determine the composition of my coins and thus to compare their silver content, and I would request to be able to use it on all six of my coins. This would allow me to both compare to known trends of decreasing silver content throughout the third century and to more accurately date the coins by placing them into these very trends, allowing me to possibly place them better into their historical context. While it would be optimal to run XRF analyses on all six of these coins, if this is not possible I would request to run such analyses on as many as possible, and I would use those with the earliest and latest dates, with a minimum of two coins to be analysed. If it were only possible to analyse one coin, this would undermine the comparative nature of my analysis, and thus would be extremely suboptimal. It should be noted that XRF has been used for similar analyses of silver content in coins successfully before, for example by Italiano, L. Torrisi, Cutroneo, Gentile and A. Torrisi in their 2012 paper in which they analysed the compositions of silver coins from the first century BCE up to the time of writing using XRF, finding it to be highly effective. This shows clearly the utility of XRF in metallurgical analyses like the one I am proposing. 

Raman spectroscopy would also be excellent to apply to these coins, though I am not aware of any particular benefits associated with Raman spectroscopy over XRF or the other way around with these coins as the subject matter, and thus am content with either analytical method. Optimally, I would have access to both methods for all six coins, and would be able to compare the two techniques as well, possibly providing further insights into silver content, though this is probably unlikely and so I would be contented with either (though I understand XRF to be cheaper than Raman and so this may be more practical).

In my analysis of these coins, I would utilise the available techniques on the intact coins, though as I have six, if possible, I would like to take a cutting of one, or perhaps even grind one down to provide a fuller analysis of the composition of the coin beneath the surface. Optimally I would grind down two complete coins that had already been identified to be on opposite ends of the spectrum of dating within the third century (one with high silver content and one with low). This would enable far more accurate compositional analysis, and would allow me to gain further insights into silver content within the coins and compare it to the surface. Emperors in the late third century produced almost completely bronze coins, coated in a thin layer of silver that usually rubbed off after production. Given this, it would be intriguing to compare silver content between the surface and the inner layers of the coins. If I were to be able to use such destructive techniques on some of these coins, it may be prudent to create 3D models of them digitally in addition to extensive photographic documentation so that their features may be visually studied in future to some extent, more easily at least than if they were simply destroyed with no record. If 3D scanning is not possible, then I would resort to the aforementioned extensive photographic documentation only.

In conclusion, I wish to investigate the differences in silver content in the six third century antoniniani I have been given to determine their relation to the debasing of the Roman currency in the third century. This requires both typological and compositional analysis, for the latter of which I request the use of either XRF or Raman spectroscopy instruments, or preferably both. I also propose that some of the coins may be destructively analysed and extensively visually documented so further typological analysis may be carried out, as this would enable greater understanding of the differences in silver content between the surfaces and interiors of the coins.

## Bibliography

- Ancient Coins - Roman Silver Antoninianus (no date). Available at: https://24carat.co.uk/antoninianiframe.html (Accessed: 10 April 2021).
- Desjardins, J. (2016) ‘Currency and the Collapse of the Roman Empire’, Visual Capitalist, 19 February. Available at: https://www.visualcapitalist.com/currency-and-the-collapse-of-the-roman-empire/ (Accessed: 10 April 2021).
- ‘File:Fineness of early Roman Imperial silver coins.png’ (no date) Wikipedia. Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Fineness_of_early_Roman_Imperial_silver_coins.png (Accessed: 10 April 2021).
- Gentile, C. (no date) ‘A comparative analysis of old and recent Ag coins by XRF methodology’. Available at: https://www.academia.edu/4252404/A_comparative_analysis_of_old_and_recent_Ag_coins_by_XRF_methodology (Accessed: 10 April 2021).
- Keturakis, C. J. et al. (2016) ‘Analysis of corrosion layers in ancient Roman silver coins with high resolution surface spectroscopic techniques’, Applied Surface Science, 376, pp. 241–251. doi: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.03.009.
- Pardini, L. et al. (2012) ‘X-Ray Fluorescence and Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy analysis of Roman silver denarii’, Spectrochimica Acta Part B: Atomic Spectroscopy, 74–75, pp. 156–161. doi: 10.1016/j.sab.2012.06.016.
- Pense, A. W. (1992) ‘The decline and fall of the roman denarius’, Materials Characterization, 29(2), pp. 213–222. doi: 10.1016/1044-5803(92)90116-Y.
- The Fall of the Roman denarius | moneymuseum.com (no date). Available at: https://www.moneymuseum.com/en/for-sunflower/the-fall-of-the-roman-denarius-460?&slbox=true (Accessed: 10 April 2021).
